--- Page 1 ---
Article
Towards Detecting Chinese Harmful Memes with Fine-Grained
Explanatory Augmentation
Xinhao Chen, Dongxin Wen and Decheng Zuo *
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China; chenxinhao@ftcl.hit.edu.cn (X.C.);
wdongxin@hit.edu.cn (D.W.)
* Correspondence: zuodc@hit.edu.cn
Abstract
The rapid proliferation of social media and generative large language models has increased
multimodal harmful content, making harmful meme detection and explanation generation
crucial for content moderation. In Chinese social media, meme harmfulness relies on
implicit visual–textual interactions in cultural contexts, but existing research lacks a com-
prehensive understanding of such cultural specificity. This neglect of the social background
knowledge and metaphorical expressions inherent in memes results in limited detection
performance. To address this challenge, we propose a novel fine-grained explanation-
enhanced Chinese harmful meme detection framework (FG-E2HMD), a framework using
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) with a culturally aware explanation genera-
tion module to produce structured explanations, which integrate with multimodal features
for decision-making. Comprehensive quantitative experiments and qualitative analyses
were conducted on ToxiCN MM, the first large-scale dataset dedicated to Chinese harmful
meme detection. The experimental results reveal that existing methods still have significant
limitations in detecting Chinese harmful memes. Concurrently, our framework improves
detection accuracy and decision transparency by incorporating explicit Chinese cultural
background knowledge, paving the way for more intelligent, culturally adaptive content
moderation systems.
Keywords: Chinese harmful meme detection; Multimodal Large Language Model; content
moderation system; explainable artificial intelligence
Academic Editor: Chiman Kwan
Received: 25 July 2025
Revised: 27 August 2025
Accepted: 1 September 2025 1. Introduction
Published: 1 September 2025
In the era of digital information, memes have emerged as a pivotal component of
Citation: Chen, X.; Wen, D.; Zuo, D.
internet culture, serving as a multimodal information carrier that integrates images and text.
Towards Detecting Chinese Harmful
Owing to their humorous and highly communicative characteristics, memes significantly
Memes with Fine-Grained Explanatory
Augmentation. Electronics 2025, 14, shape public communication and influence the public opinion ecosystem. Nevertheless, the
3504. https://doi.org/10.3390/ ubiquity of memes and their substantial impact render them a double-edged sword. Beyond
electronics14173504 fulfilling benign entertainment and social functions, memes are increasingly employed as
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors. covert instruments for disseminating hate speech, promoting extremist ideologies, spread-
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. ing misinformation, and engaging in personal attacks [1,2]. The vast quantity of memes
This article is an open access article on the internet and social media platforms presents a significant economic burden when
distributed under the terms and
manually reviewed. Consequently, there is an urgent need to develop multimodal content
conditions of the Creative Commons
understanding technology for the automatic identification of harmful memes. However, the
Attribution (CC BY) license
implicit and satirical nature of these harmful memes poses a serious challenge to automatic
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics14173504

--- Page 2 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 2 of 20
content moderation systems. In 2020, Facebook hosted the Multimodal Hate Meme Detec-
tion competition, marking a significant milestone in research on toxic meme detection [2].
Numerous datasets have been proposed by researchers, and corresponding recognition
methods have been developed, yielding favorable recognition results [3–6]. However, these
studies have primarily centered on English memes. Despite some advancements in this
area, the body of research concerning Chinese harmful memes remains notably limited.
On the one hand, the harmfulness of Chinese harmful memes is often not reflected
in literal meanings or individual image elements but is deeply rooted in complex cultural
contexts. Harmful memes are typically characterized as multimodal units, combining
image and text, that inflict harm on individuals, organizations, communities, or social
groups by targeting specific social entities. Moreover, memes on Chinese platforms often
encompass general offenses, sexual innuendos, or promote a disheartening culture. Even
though these memes sometimes lack specific targets, they still possess potential toxicity.
Subtly promoting negative values, they can contribute to severe consequences such as
violent acts and sexual harassment [7]. The creators or spreaders of these memes might
employ homophonic jokes, historical references, social events, and internet subcultures as a
means to obscure their true intentions. Such intentions necessitate a nuanced understanding
of culture to be unearthed [7–9]. For instance, the act of juxtaposing a commonplace image
with an ostensibly unrelated ancient poem or internet catchphrase to indirectly criticize a
specific group or individual would likely go unnoticed by an automatic moderation system
devoid of the requisite cultural knowledge [10–13].
On the other hand, even the most powerful large multimodal models, including
Qwen2.5-VL and GPT4o, possess significant general world knowledge. However, without
targeted guidance and fine-tuning, these models frequently miss the intricate nuances
of specific cultural contexts, particularly within the Chinese internet. As noted by Yang
et al. [7], a deep understanding of Chinese multimodal content requires culturally embed-
ded visual literacy, a crucial element that these general models often lack.
The existing research on the detection and interpretive generation of harmful memes
primarily focuses on the targets of the memes and the corresponding harmful content,
overlooking the understanding of the metaphorical expressions of harmful memes and the
related cultural background knowledge. Consequently, this creates a significant barrier
for individuals lacking the requisite background knowledge to comprehend their implicit
meaning [14–17]. Scott et al. [8] demonstrate that metaphor is one of the main expressions
of harmful memes. Currently, the vast majority of content moderation systems operate
like a black box, only outputting a label of “harmful” or “harmless” without providing
explanations for their decisions. This opacity not only undermines the trustworthiness
of moderation outcomes but also prevents platform administrators and users from com-
prehending the essence of harmful content, undoubtedly hindering the construction of
a healthy online community ecosystem [18–20]. Recent research has begun to address
this issue, such as Lin et al. [9] proposing to generate explanations through debates from
both harmful and harmless perspectives using a large multimodal model. However, it
has not yet systematically integrated culturally specific knowledge into the explanation
process. Therefore, the identification of metaphorical expressions in harmful memes, along
with the associated cultural and social background knowledge, is essential for generating
comprehensive, accurate, and easily understandable explanations [21–24]. As illustrated in
Figure 1a, from the text within the image, including the phrases “generation gap”, “Palace
Jade Liquid Wine”, “180 yuan per cup”, and “post-00s”—along with the three wolves in
the image displaying divergent facial expressions—it is impossible to deduce the cause of
the generation gap. The understanding of the meme’s profound meaning becomes clear
only when one integrates the cultural context that the phrase “ Palace Jade Liquid Wine,

--- Page 3 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 3 of 20
180 yuan per cup” originates from the sketch “Strange Encounters at Work” performed at
the 1996 CCTV Spring Festival Gala. The image features two wolves on either side with
open mouths, suggesting joyful communication, whereas the central wolf, labeled “post-
00s”, exhibits a confused demeanor [25–27]. Given that individuals born post-2000 most
likely have not watched “Strange Encounters at Work”, this meme humorously underscores
the linguistic and cultural disparities between generations. As illustrated in Figure 1b, a pig
is playing with a cabbage, and the text shows “I’ve settled you down”. Without considering
the Chinese cultural background knowledge, this meme might be judged as harmless.
However, when viewed within the context of Chinese cultural background knowledge, it
becomes apparent that this is a meme with gender discrimination against men. Because
this image expresses a Chinese proverb “All cabbage had been twiddled by pig”, which is
a satire on some male–female relationships where the male’s overall quality is perceived
to be inferior to the female’s. As shown in Figure 1c, the image shows five green puppy
plush toys, and the text shows “which vegetable dog are you”, which would be judged as
harmless without Chinese cultural background knowledge considered, while with Chinese
cultural background considered, “vegetable dog” is a Chinese ironic phrase to mock some
people who are incompetent. Thus, recognizing the metaphorical techniques in memes and
incorporating pertinent cultural knowledge is imperative for assessing the potential harm
of Chinese memes.
In order to address the aforementioned challenges, we focus on Chinese harmful
meme detection, aiming to build an automatic moderation system that is both accurate and
interpretable. Our main contributions are as follows:
1. We propose a novel explanation-enhanced detection framework, which is designed
around a two-stage “first explanation, then judgment” mechanism. Initially, the
framework is directed to generate a structured reasoning process that is both human-
readable and of high quality (i.e., an explanation). Subsequently, this explanation is
leveraged to enhance the final classification decision. This methodology significantly
bolsters the robustness and accuracy of meme detection.
2. In this study, we take the lead in systematically integrating Chinese cultural back-
ground knowledge into our harmful meme detection model. This integration is both
explicit and structural, ensuring a comprehensive understanding and generation of
Chinese cultural background knowledge within the model. We employ a meticu-
lously crafted “culture-aware prompt” to effectively activate and guide the MLLM to
utilize the extensive knowledge acquired during its pre-training phase. This approach
enables the MLLM to decode the profound cultural connotations embedded within
memes.
3. We conducted extensive experiments on ToxiCN MM [10], the largest dataset of
Chinese harmful memes with fine-grained annotations and compared the performance
with various advanced methods. The experimental results fully demonstrated the
effectiveness of our proposed method.
Overall, this work presents an MLLM-based fine-grained explanation-enhanced frame-
work for Chinese harmful meme detection. Different from previous work, our proposed
method prompts the model to output a structured description of “cultural background-
metaphor-harm-target of attack” based on Chinese context through carefully designed
prompt templates. By leveraging the powerful image understanding and text generation
capabilities of Multimodal Large Language Models, the generated descriptions serve as
strong auxiliary information, combined with multimodal image–text alignment features
to enhance the overall performance of the model. The proposed method is rigorously
evaluated on the ToxiCN MM test, set against various state-of-the-art models to verify its
effectiveness. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the

--- Page 4 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 4 of 20
related works. Section 3 outlines our proposed method, including three key components
and culture-aware prompt templates. Section 4 presents and analyzes the experimental
results. Section 5 discusses several cases and corresponding limitations and considerations.
Finally, Section 6 concludes this work and highlights future directions.
(a)
(b) (c)
Figure 1. Example of meme interpretation generation, incorporating explanations with Chinese
cultural background knowledge. (a) The “Imperial Jade Liquor wine, priced at 180 yuan per cup”,
comes from the 1996 CCTV Spring Festival Gala sketch “An Odd Job Encounter”. Meanwhile, the
image shows two wolves on the left and right opening their mouths as if happily communicating,
while the wolf marked with “post-00” in the middle displays a puzzled expression. People born after
the year 2000 probably have not seen the sketch “An Odd Job Encounter”, so this meme humorously
reflects generational differences in language and cultural barriers between age groups. (b) This
image expresses a Chinese proverb “All cabbage had been twiddled by pig”, which is satire on some
male–female relationships where the male’s overall quality is perceived to be inferior to the female’s.
This image conveys gender bias. (c) This image conveys general offense and does not target any
specific person of groups. “Vegetable dog” is a Chinese slut, implying incompetent people.
2. Related Works
2.1. Multimodal Harmful Meme Detection
Harmful meme detection, as an important branch of multimodal content safety, has
garnered significant attention in recent years [28–30]. Initial research efforts concentrated
on the development of sophisticated fusion modules to integrate image and text features.
With the success of the Transformer architecture [12], subsequent studies have employed
Visual Transformer (ViT) [13] for visual understanding and BERT [11] for text understand-
ing. These studies then leveraged the cross-attention mechanism to capture cross-modal
correlations. For instance, the HMGUARD [1] framework enhances detection capabilities
by analyzing propaganda techniques and visual arts. Ji et al. [14] argue that mapping
the extracted text and image features to a unified feature space may introduce significant
semantic discrepancies, potentially compromising the final performance of the model.

--- Page 5 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 5 of 20
Therefore, they propose to first generate descriptive text and key-attribute information of
image data, thus converting multimodal data into unimodal pure text data. Following
this conversion, a prompt-based pre-trained language model processes the textual data,
facilitating the detection of multimodal harmful memes [31–34]. However, the majority of
these works have been trained and validated on English datasets, and their applicability to
Chinese and other linguistic and cultural contexts still requires verification. The ToxiCN
MM dataset is the first fine-grained annotated Chinese harmful meme dataset, which
primarily encompasses the following dimensions: harmfulness assessment, a binary
classification to determine whether the meme is harmful; identification of harmful types,
a multi-classification involving targeted harmful, sexual innuendo, general offense, and
dispirited culture; and modality combination feature analysis, which examines whether
the harmful content is conveyed through text alone, images alone, or a combination of
both. This framework employs a straightforward yet effective visual prompt tuning
paradigm to optimize the mutual information between images and texts. It achieves this
by incorporating a cross-modal contrastive alignment objective. Although ToxiCN MM
and CHMEMES are both Chinese harmful meme datasets, they have not explored the
research of generating explanations related to harmfulness combined with the Chinese
cultural background knowledge.
2.2. Explainable Multimodal Learning
Memes frequently employ a plethora of rhetorical devices, such as metaphors, which
often elude the current image caption generation methods designed for precise depiction
of image scenes, due to their inability to interpret the inherent deep meanings [35–37]. As
research on multimodal memes progressively deepens, researchers have further proposed
the field of meme interpretation generation. Hee et al. [16] have developed HatReD, a
human-curated dataset for generating explanations of multimodal hateful memes, in an
endeavor to augment comprehension of the implications embedded within such memes.
Their research has revealed a pronounced disparity between the performance of current
State-of-The-Art (SOTA) multimodal pre-trained models and that of human experts when
encountering memes from novel domains. This study constitutes a fundamental basis
for future investigations into the field of harmful meme explanation generation. Hwang
et al. [17] constructed a dataset called MemeCap. Each meme in this dataset was annotated
with text information, image description, metaphorical expression, and human-generated
meme interpretation. Lin et al. [9] simulated a multimodal debate between pro and con
perspectives, enabling their model to generate arguments from both harmful and non-
harmful viewpoints, and make a final judgment based on these arguments [38–41]. Our
work takes a step forward on the basis of this idea, not only pursuing the generation of
explanations but also emphasizing the cultural depth and structured nature of the content
and using it as a key information source to improve decision-making accuracy.
2.3. Chinese Content Security and Cultural Particularity
Chinese information processing is challenging due to its unique linguistic and cultural
characteristics. For advancing research in this area, a high-quality dataset is essential.
The ToxiCN MM dataset represents a groundbreaking effort. As the first large-scale, fine-
grained annotated Chinese harmful meme dataset, it provides a valuable cornerstone for
researching multimodal harmful meme detection in the Chinese domain. Yang et al. [7]
explicitly proposed the concept of culture-embedded visual literacy in their work and
systematically explored various challenges in Chinese multimodal content detection, which
emphasized the necessity of incorporating cultural knowledge. Zhu et al. [18] proposed
the MiniGPT-4 model, which consists of a frozen ViT and Q-Former vision encoder, a linear

--- Page 6 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 6 of 20
projection layer, and frozen Vicuna. The MiniGPT-4 only needs to train a linear projection
layer to align the visual features and Vicuna. Zhang et al. [19] proposed a multimodal
model named LLaMA-Adapter, which adaptively injects image features into LLaMA
based on a gated zero-initialized attention mechanism while preserving the knowledge
obtained from its pre-training stage, achieving good results in downstream tasks. Gao
et al. [20] introduced LLaMA-Adapter V2, an enhanced version of LLaMA-Adapter. This
model is fine-tuned using highly parameter-efficient visual instructions to achieve superior
recognition performance in downstream tasks. Remarkably, it accomplishes this with fewer
fine-tuning parameters compared with its predecessor, demonstrating improved efficiency
and effectiveness. Subsequently, Liu et al. [21] introduced the LLaVA model, which employs
GPT-4 to generate instruction fine-tuning training data. During the training phase, visual
tokens are incorporated for instruction fine-tuning, utilizing GPT-4’s responses to align
with the user’s intent. Ye et al. [22] unveiled a comprehensive multimodal model, mPLUG-
Owl, exhibiting superior visual-language comprehension capabilities. Notably, it can
interpret visual element-centric jokes. In our study, the proposed FG-E2HMD significantly
enhances the efficacy of large multimodal models in detecting Chinese harmful memes.
By integrating a culturally aware prompt, we further activate the extensive knowledge
of MLLM acquired during pre-training, enabling a more accurate decoding of meme
metaphors and profound cultural nuances.
3. Materials and Methods
The core idea of our method is to imitate the cognitive process of human experts
in reviewing harmful content. When an expert is faced with a suspicious meme, they
do not immediately make an intuitive judgment but go through an analytical process
of decomposition, reasoning, and integration: first, observe the images and text; then,
mobilize their background knowledge (including culture, history, and current events, etc.)
for analysis, thereby forming a complete chain-of-explanation; and finally, based on this
logically rigorous chain-of-explanation, give a final professional judgment. Our framework
is designed to mimic this intricate procedure, encapsulated by the core principle: “Explain
first, then predict”. Instead of directly producing the final output from the raw input, we
introduce an explicit, structured explanation generation step as an intermediate bridge.
This explanation facilitates human comprehension and operates as a refined and amplified
signal, steering the model towards more dependable decisions. To this end, we design an
overall model architecture as shown in Figure 2, comprising three pivotal modules: (1) a
multimodal feature alignment module, (2) a culture-aware explanation generation module,
and (3) an explanation-enhanced decision-making module.
Figure 2. Overview of the FG-E2HMD framework for Chinese harmful meme detection.

--- Page 7 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 7 of 20
3.1. Multimodal Feature Alignment
This module is designed to extract both intermodal and intramodal information
from the meme, converting raw multimodal data into deep semantic features. Drawing
inspiration from Hee et al. [6], we employ a leading pre-trained model to secure high-
quality representations. Given that our focus is on detecting Chinese harmful memes, we
utilize the Qwen2.5-VL as our vision–language encoder. Specifically, we feed the meme
image, denoted as I, and its text T into the frozen pre-trained multimodal large model to
generate a unified multimodal representation F :
mm
F = Encoder ([I, T])
mm MLLM
F will serve as the input basis for all subsequent modules.
mm
3.2. Culture-Aware Explanation Generation
This is the core component of our proposed framework, designed to accept the mul-
timodal representation F and a piece of culture-aware prompt template, subsequently
mm
generating a high-quality, structured, and culturally enriched explanatory text T . We
exp
achieve this by fine-tuning a powerful large multimodal model (Qwen2.5-VL in our method)
with instructions. Inspired by [10], we meticulously crafted a series of refined instruction
templates that employed a chain-of-thought-like approach, directing the MLLMs to execute
systematic, step-by-step reasoning and generate outputs adhering to a predefined struc-
ture [23]. This not only enhances the structure of the output but also guarantees that crucial
aspects of the explanations are not overlooked. The template example is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Example of an instruction template.
Prompt Template:
You are a multimodal content security expert with a deep understanding of
Chinese culture and the online ecosystem. Please analyze the given meme and provide a
structured analysis based on the following four aspects:
Cultural Background Analysis: Does this image or text involve specific cultural
elements of China (such as historical events, characters, internet memes, proverbs, social
phenomena, etc.)? Please specify its origin and meaning.
Metaphor and Subtext: How are the image and text content combined, and what
are they implying, suggesting, or insinuating? What is the underlying subtext
or metaphor?
Harm Assessment: Based on the above analysis, please determine whether the
meme is harmful or harmless.
Target of Attack: If the meme is harmful, please indicate which specific individual,
group, or organization is being targeted, attacked, satirized, or smeared.
Summarize the above generated content into 5 sentences, with no more than
50 words in each sentence.
By fine-tuning the model through structured and well-designed instructional prompts,
the model learns to systematically decompose and analyze a meme. This approach provides
a more detailed understanding than a general impression, which is particularly beneficial
for decision-makers seeking a concrete basis for judgment.
3.3. Explanation-Enhanced Decisions
With the structured explanation text T obtained, this module is responsible for
exp
utilizing it to assist and enhance the final classification decision. As shown in the overall
architecture of the model in Figure 2, the generated explanatory text T is first input into
exp
the text encoder RoBERTa to obtain its deep semantic representation F . F is the essence
exp exp

--- Page 8 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 8 of 20
of the model’s inference and refinement of the original information, focusing on the key
harmful information underlying the meme. We integrate the original multimodal features
F with the generated explanatory features F using a simple vector concatenation to
mm exp
obtain the final decision-making features F = (cid:2) F ; F (cid:3) , in which F ∈ R h ×2
f inal mm exp f inal
and h represents the dimension of the hidden layer of the model. Finally, the fused F is
f inal
fed into a simple trainable classifier, which first performs a linear transformation on F ,
f inal
and then generates detection probability through the softmax function to judge whether
the meme is harmful. Since F contains both original information and explanatory
f inal
information after logical reasoning, the decision-making process is thus more robust,
transparent, and accurate.
4. Experimental Results and Analysis
4.1. Datasets and Baselines
All the experiments of this work are conducted on ToxiCN MM, which is the first
large-scale dataset for Chinese harmful meme detection, containing 12,000 samples with
fine-grained annotations of meme types. We follow its official data split, which divides the
dataset into training set (80%), validation set (10%), and test set (10%), and mainly conduct
a binary classification task of harmful or non-harmful. In addition to the FG-E2HMD
proposed in this paper, we have evaluated the performance of various baseline models.
These baseline models include both unimodal and multimodal types. For unimodal model
baselines, we select DeepSeek-V3, RoBERTa, and GPT4 as pure text modality baselines to
directly classify the text of the memes and Image-Region, ResNet, and ViT as pure image
modality baselines to directly classify the extracted image features of the memes. For
multimodal model baselines, we choose GPT4, CLIP+MKE, Visual BERT COCO, Hate-
CLIPper, MOMENTA, PromptHate, zero-shot Qwen2.5-VL (here Qwen2.5-VL is not fine-
tuned but is directly asked the question “Is this meme toxic?” and judged based on its
response), and the SOTA model related to explanation generation, debate-based model [9],
then fine-tune it on ToxiCN MM. These are the main comparison objects of our method.
Furthermore, for the baseline models we compared, if there is the same baseline as that in
ToxiCN MM, the results in ToxiCN MM are directly adopted.
4.2. Evaluation Metrics
We employ precision, recall, macro F1-score, and the F1 score of toxic memes as our
evaluation metrics. Since our work mainly targets the detection of Chinese harmful memes,
the MLLM in the overall framework is the frozen Qwen2.5-VL, which primarily functions
as the encoder in the visual-language alignment module and the explanation generator in
the culture-aware explanation generation module. For the encoder within the explanation-
enhanced decision module, we opt for RoBERTa, given its superior encoding capabilities
for Chinese texts. Notably, the specific version we use is chinese-roberta-wwm-ext-base.
4.3. Parameter Setting
The experimental parameters are set as follows: the batch size is 32, the learning rate
is 1 × 10−5, and the number of training epochs is 10. We use AdamW as our optimization
strategy, with the decay rate β and β set to 0.9 and 0.95, respectively. The weight decay is
1 2
set to 0.02 to perform regularization control on the model parameters. The Qwen2.5-VL
used is the 7B version. All experiments were conducted on two NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs.
For details, see Appendix A.1 and Table A2.

--- Page 9 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 9 of 20
4.4. Quantitative Analysis
We evaluated our proposed FG-E2HMD and all baseline models on the ToxiCN MM
test set, and the detailed results are shown in Table 2. As can be seen from the experimen-
tal results, multimodal models generally outperform unimodal models, confirming the
efficacy of integrating image and text features for identifying harmful memes. Although
the zero-shot performance of the general multimodal large model Qwen2.5-VL is com-
mendable, it falls short of models that have been specifically fine-tuned, underscoring
the importance of domain adaptation. Notably, the two interpretation-based methods,
the debate-based model and our proposed FG-E2HMD, markedly outperformed other
baselines except for CLIP+MKE. This suggests that generating detailed explanations of rich
cultural backgrounds enhances model performance in detecting Chinese harmful memes.
Most importantly, our proposed FG-E2HMD has reached the SOTA performance in all met-
rics, with an F1 score of 83.39, which has increased by 3.94% compared with the previous
best CLIP+MKE model. In addition, the performance of our proposed FG-E2HMD is also
significantly superior to another interpretation-based method, the debate-based model.
This fully demonstrates the superiority of our culture-aware and explanation-enhancement
mechanisms over general explanation generation techniques.
Table 2. Performance comparison of different models on the ToxiCN MM test set. The best and
second-best results of each metric are highlighted in bold and underlined, respectively.
Model P R F1 F1
harm
DeepSeek-V3 74.63 75.36 74.99 58.75
Text-only RoBERTa 75.52 77.54 76.36 66.48
GPT4 74.52 65.59 68.01 51.78
Image-Region 65.96 66.06 66.01 52.95
Image-only ResNet 66.61 66.92 66.76 53.76
ViT 68.97 68.61 68.78 57.24
GPT4 74.67 68.64 70.11 55.77
CLIP+MKE 79.76 80.79 80.23 72.35
VisualBERT COCO 72.21 69.36 70.76 57.21
Hate-CLIPper 73.56 68.52 70.95 60.36
Multimodal
MOMENTA 74.05 69.88 71.90 62.45
PromptHate 75.83 72.36 74.05 63.15
Qwen2.5-VL(zero-shot) 70.25 73.36 71.77 58.76
Debate-based model 79.93 81.16 79.91 70.53
FG-E2HMD 83.53 83.26 83.39 74.43
4.5. Ablation Study
To verify the effectiveness and necessity of each innovative module in FG-E2HMD, we
have conducted a series of ablation experiments, the results of which are shown in Table 3.
The results of ablation experiments indicate that
• “Structured output” provides stable gains. Removing the requirement for structured
output, there is a slight decline in model performance (2.54%/1.81%). This indicates
that forcing the model to think and express according to the logical chain of “cultural
background-metaphor-harmfulness-target of attack” helps form a more organized and
focused reasoning process, thereby bringing about stable performance improvements.

--- Page 10 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 10 of 20
• “Cultural awareness” is the core. After removing the specially designed culture-aware
prompt and switching to a generic prompt, there was a significant drop in model
performance (3.39%/2.78%). This indicates that explicitly incorporating the cultural
background information that a meme might imply into the model’s thinking and
analysis process greatly benefits the performance of the model in the task of detecting
harmful memes.
• “Explanation-enhanced decision-making” is of paramount importance. Removing the
explanation-enhanced decision-making module results in the largest performance drop
(9.65%/9.23%). This indicates that simply generating an explanation is insufficient. Most
importantly, there is a need to effectively reintegrate high-quality explanation features
into the decision-making process in order to optimize the model’s final performance.
• Structured representation and the culture-aware prompt have complementary gains.
Removing the culture-aware prompt alone results in a 3.39 decrease in F1; when si-
multaneously removing the structured representation (line 6), the F1 further decreases
by 10.3, a decrease significantly greater than the sum of the two individual decreases
(3.39 + 2.54 = 5.93). This “superposition” decrease indicates that the structured output
provides more controllable semantic slots for cultural prompts, while cultural prompts
in turn enhance the adaptability of structured representation to the Chinese language
context, forming a positive coupling between the two.
• Complete framework achieves robust detection through “Divide and Conquer”. When
all the three modules are removed (last row), the model degrades into a normal black-
box classifier, and F1 drops to 72.33, 13.18% points lesser than the complete framework.
This verifies the design hypothesis of FG-E2HMD:
• Structured representation is responsible for the controllable output at the “form” level.
• The culture-aware prompt is responsible for the alignment of cultural context at the
“content” level.
• Explanation enhancement is responsible for the “logic” layer of verifiable reasoning.
• After superimposing the three models, the model achieves the current optimal 83.39 F1
in the task of Chinese harmful meme detection and has significant fault tolerance to
the local failure of individual modules.
Table 3. Evaluation results of the ablation experiments. The bold indicates optimal results, and
the numbers before and after the “/” in the performance drop column correspond to the degree of
decline in F1 and F1 , respectively.
harm
Method F1 F1 Performance Drop Interpretation
harm
A complete framework
Full FG-E2HMD 83.39 74.43 —
containing all modules.
Do not force structured output
W/O structured representation 81.27 73.08 2.54%/1.81% and generate free-form text
explanations.
Use the general prompt (directly
W/O culture-aware prompt 80.56 72.36 3.39%/2.78% prompt the model to “explain
why it is harmful”).
Remove the
“explanation-enhancement
W/O explanation enhancement 75.34 67.56 9.65%/9.23%
decision-making module” and
classify directly using F .
mm
Jointly remove the culture-aware
W/O culture-aware prompt and
77.65 68.93 6.88%/7.39% prompt and explanation
explanation enhancement
enhancement.

--- Page 11 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 11 of 20
Table 3. Cont.
Method F1 F1 Performance Drop Interpretation
harm
Jointly remove the culture-aware
W/O structured representation
74.82 67.02 10.3%/9.9% prompt and structured
and culture-aware prompt
representation.
Jointly remove explanation
W/O explanation enhancement
76.03 68.11 8.83%/8.50% enhancement and structured
and structured representation
reprensentation.
W/O all three modules 72.33 64.81 13.18%/12.92% Remove all three modules.
5. Discussion
To further illustrate the basic principle of FG-E2HMD, as shown in Table 4, we provide
three cases for study. From the textual caption and the image caption information of case (a),
it can be seen that both our work and the compared baselines have captured the keyword
“ugly thing” and simultaneously captured the exaggerated expression and emotionally
excited demeanor of the man in the picture; thus, both have correctly classified case (a).
However, the explanation generated by our model interprets “skr” as mockery and sarcasm.
But from the perspective of Chinese internet culture, the popularity of “skr” originates from
a Chinese rap show, which means to praise the contestant, generally referring to being very
good. This may be due to the hallucination of the underlying MLLM. The original meaning
of “skr” in case (a) should be a homophonic pun in Chinese internet culture, pronounced
similar to “shi ge”, which means “is a”; thus, incorporating the text into the meme, it forms
a complete sentence “You are an ugly thing”. This is the true understanding of the deep
meaning of this meme.
Table 4. Explanation of the case study. The green and red highlighted parts, respectively, represent
the correct and incorrect information related to meme hazard detection. In the actual implementation
process, all descriptions are in Chinese.  indicates the model makes a correct prediction, while ×
indicates the model makes a wrong prediction.
Harmful Meme
(a) You Skr Ugly Thing
(b) Scientists are Working to
(c) Girls Wash Clothes:
Cure Them
Underwear, Dark Clothes, Light
Clothes. Boys Wash Clothes.
Targeted Harmful, Targeted Harmful,
Ground Truth General Offensive, Harmful Text
Text–Image Fusion Text–Image Fusion
This is a reminder about laundry
The sentence translates to “You
classification, suggesting that girls
ugly thing”, with “skr” being an
Scientists are working to cure and boys should wash their
Text description internet slang term, overall
diseases that affect women. clothes separately, and underwear,
expressing insult and
dark, and light clothes should
dissatisfaction towards someone.
also be washed separately.

--- Page 12 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 12 of 20
Table 4. Cont.
Harmful Meme
(a) You Skr Ugly Thing
(b) Scientists are Working to
(c) Girls Wash Clothes:
Cure Them
Underwear, Dark Clothes, Light
Clothes. Boys Wash Clothes.
Two comic strips, one showing a
An exaggeratedly expressive and
woman tidying up clothes for
emotionally agitated man, with Two girls in wedding dresses are
Image description washing, the other showing a man
his fingers pointing forward, kissing each other.
casually throwing clothes into the
seemed to be shouting.
wash, with a cat sitting below.
[Cultural Background Analysis]
The image combines traditional
wedding elements, and the text
mentions “scientists are working
[Cultural Background Analysis] hard to cure them,” which implies
[Cultural Background Analysis]
The picture text combines the a humorous interpretation of the
The image utilizes gender
“skr” meme in Chinese internet phenomenon of
stereotypes in Chinese internet
culture, carrying a mocking and same-sex weddings.
culture, emphasizing the
sarcastic meaning. [Metaphor and Subtext] The
meticulousness of girls and the
[Metaphor and Subtext] stereotype and bias towards
roughness of boys.
Expressions paired with text sexual minorities are
[Metaphor and Subtext] The
implied a disparaging attitude, metaphorically represented
comparison of washing clothes is
denigrating someone’s through the kissing scene and the
a metaphor for the traditional
appearance or behavior. words “scientists are working
social perception of the
[Harmfulness Determination] The hard to cure them”.
Explanation from differences in behavior between
meme is highly offensive and [Harmfulness Determination] The
FG-E2HMD men and women.
potentially harmful through its content is clearly insulting and
[Harmfulness etermination]
abusive language. offensive and belongs to
The content is inoffensive and is
[Target of Attack] Its main target harmful content.
meant primarily to entertain the
is individuals referred to as “ugly [Target of Attack] The main attack
audience and evoke resonance.
things”, the specifics of which target is the sexual minority
[Target of Attack] No attacks or
are unclear. group (LGBTQ + group), which
insults were made against
[Conclusion] Based on a strengthens discrimination
specific groups.
comprehensive assessment, this against them.
[Conclusion] It is a harmless
meme is considered harmful [Conclusion] This meme belongs
product of online culture and is
content and should be to harmful content. It utilizes
suitable for easy sharing.
disseminated with caution. stereotypes of sexual minorities,
easily inciting insults and harm
against the LGBTQ+ community,
which is not conducive to creating
an inclusive social environment.
GPT4:  Qwen2.5-VL(zero-shot): GPT4: × Qwen2.5-VL(zero-shot): GPT4: × Qwen2.5-VL(zero-shot):
Prediction  Debate-based Model:  × Debate-based Model: × × Debate-based Model: ×
FG-E2HMD:  FG-E2HMD:  FG-E2HMD: ×
5.1. Case Study
To gain more insights on the challenging issues related to Chinese harmful meme de-
tection, we manually examine most of the misclassified samples of the compared baselines
and find that the errors are mainly of two types:
• The model may occasionally misclassify a meme due to the benign information it
contains.

--- Page 13 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 13 of 20
• The model frequently demonstrates a deficiency in comprehending the intricate cul-
tural context inherent in Chinese memes, leading to erroneous judgments.
Error classification category I: As illustrated in case (b), when the model is provided
with text or image information, both the compared baselines and our proposed model judge
the input information as harmless. However, when the model is provided with both text
and image information simultaneously, only our proposed model accurately determines
that the meme is harmful. This is because our proposed model recognizes that the image
combines wedding elements from traditional culture. In the image, two women are kissing,
and our model integrates Chinese cultural background knowledge that same-sex marriage
is not permitted and, combined with the text part “scientists are working hard to cure
them”, metaphorically implies stereotypes or prejudice against the LGBTQ+ community.
The underlying implication is that homosexuality is perceived as an abnormality that needs
to be “cured”, which is ironic and can potentially provoke insults and harm to sexual
minorities. This is precisely the benefit brought by the “structured output” which leads to
a more organized and focused reasoning process, as well as the “cultural-aware prompt”
which explicitly incorporates the cultural background information behind the meme into
the process of assessing their harmfulness, further demonstrating the effectiveness of our
proposed methods.
Error classification category II: As illustrated in case (c), all models, including our
proposed one and all compared baselines, have given incorrect classification results. The
model represents the information within the image through two illustrative scenes: one
depicting a woman washing clothes after sorting them, and the other portraying a man
washing clothes without prior classification. All of these are positive information. The text
in the picture describes “This is a reminder about sorting laundry. It is recommended that
girls and boys wash their clothes separately. Underwear, dark, and light clothes should
be washed separately”, which is also benign information. While our proposed model
incorporates cultural background knowledge to examine the use of gender stereotypes
in Chinese internet culture—notably the portrayal of girls as meticulous and boys as
rough— it still assesses the meme as benign. The rationale provided is that the content is
harmless, primarily designed to entertain and evoke resonance with the audience. This
discrepancy might arise from the fact that both the compared baselines and our proposed
model were subjected to a considerable number of prompts and amount of training
data underscoring gender equality during pre-training, potentially leading to incorrect
assessments. Nevertheless, when the meme is evaluated by human experts, it becomes
evident that the meme targets the stereotype of gender discrimination. Consequently,
it is imperative to investigate more effective post-training techniques and alignment
methods with human values to balance the model’s performance and the challenge of
over-emphasis on gender equality.
The aforementioned case study further demonstrates that Chinese harmful meme
detection remains a challenging multimodal semantic understanding task for existing LLMs
and MLLMs. Beyond the comprehensive integration of visual and textual information,
effectively and accurately incorporating Chinese cultural context knowledge continues to
pose a critical challenge in this domain.
5.2. Limitations and Ethical Considerations
5.2.1. Dependence on Underlying MLLM Capabilities
Our proposed framework is constrained by the MLLM acting as the “explanation
generator”. If the base model itself lacks certain niche or lesser-known knowledge, it
will be unable to generate high-quality explanations, and in severe cases, might produce
hallucinations that are unrelated to the meme content, which could potentially exacerbate

--- Page 14 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 14 of 20
biases or stereotypes against certain social groups. Therefore, more robust methods like
retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) can be considered to ensure that the generated
explanations are more relevant and of higher quality.
5.2.2. Adaptation to New Memes
The generation and dissemination of internet memes are proliferating at an unprece-
dented pace, with novel slang terms, trending events, and expressive formats emerging
continuously on a daily basis. This phenomenon may lead to a “knowledge lag” issue,
wherein the model may fail to remain fully updated with newly emerged, previously
unseen memes that were absent from its pre-training dataset. Furthermore, despite
advancements in automated harmful meme detection, inherent biases may still persist
within the model’s operational framework. Consequently, ongoing evaluation is imper-
ative to ensure that our system maintains optimal performance and ethical integrity in
real-world applications.
5.2.3. Potential Misuse Risks
A model capable of generating deep rationales can, in theory, also be potentially
leveraged by malicious users to craft more convincing, harder-to-detect harmful content.
However, the benefits brought by deep rationales far outweigh the possible risks. By
providing deep rationales to content moderators, they can be helped to more effectively
identify and flag potentially harmful content and thus foster a more harmonious, inclusive,
and free internet environment.
6. Conclusions
This study systematically addresses the dual challenges of cultural comprehension
disparities and interpretability deficiencies in Chinese harmful meme detection by propos-
ing an innovative explanation-enhanced detection framework leveraging large multimodal
models. Rather than treating the model as an end-to-end black box, we innovatively intro-
duce a culture-aware explanation generation module that strategically guides the model to
adopt an “explain-before-judging” paradigm. Through extensive experiments on the first
large-scale Chinese harmful meme dataset ToxiCN MM, we empirically validate the efficacy
of our proposed FG-E2HMD framework. The FG-E2HMD we proposed achieved the best
results on the ToxiCN MM test set, with 83.39 F1 score and 74.43 F1 score, respectively.
harm
The results demonstrably establish that the explanation-enhanced decision-making ap-
proach, particularly when augmented with cultural context integration, constitutes a robust
solution for Chinese harmful meme detection. We attribute the method’s success to the
explicit explanation generation mechanism, which compels the model to transition from
superficial pattern recognition to sophisticated logical reasoning. This mechanism, similar
to the chain-of-thought, enables the model to decompose complex problems and focus
on the key semantics in the task, thereby avoiding intuitive misjudgments arising from
reliance on superficial data features alone.
Future Work
In terms of future work, we will design more effective methods to address the task of
Chinese harmful meme detection. This will be developed from the following aspects:
• Automatic knowledge updating mechanism: we will investigate methods to dy-
namically integrate external knowledge bases such as online encyclopedias, modern
language dictionaries, and real-time news feeds into the model to further improve its
ability to learn continuously and adapt to evolving meme trends.

--- Page 15 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 15 of 20
• Cross-cultural multilingual meme detection: the proposed framework will be ex-
tended to other languages and cultural contexts (e.g., Japanese, Korean) to explore
the development of a flexible, configurable content moderation system capable of
operating effectively in multicultural environments.
• Zero-shot and few-shot learning: we will examine how the model can leverage
its strong inference capabilities to achieve efficient, explanation-enhanced harmful
content detection under data-scarce or zero-shot conditions, thereby broadening its
applicability to emerging and low-resource risk scenarios.
• Lightweight interpretation model solution: We will design a knowledge distillation
framework to transfer the knowledge from large interpretive models to small models
and meanwhile, introduce model pruning and quantization techniques. We aim to
reduce the number of parameters and computational complexity and explore a simpli-
fied version of the attention mechanism while retaining key explanatory capabilities
and reducing computational overhead. In addition, we plan to design hierarchical
explanation strategies and generate explanations in stages based on the harmfulness
level of the memes.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, X.C. and D.W.; Methodology, X.C.; Software, X.C.; Val-
idation, X.C.; Formal analysis, X.C. and D.Z.; Investigation, X.C.; Resources, X.C. and D.Z.; Data
curation, X.C.; Writing—original draft preparation, X.C. and D.W.; Writing—review and editing, X.C.
and D.Z.; Visualization, X.C.; Supervision, D.W. and D.Z.; Project administration, D.Z. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
61202091, 62171155).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available in the public domain:
https://github.com/DUT-lujunyu/ToxiCN_MM/ (accessed on 25 July 2025).
Acknowledgments: We would like to express our gratitude to the members and staff of the Fault
Tolerance and Mobile Computing Research Center at Harbin Institute of Technology.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
MLLMs Multimodal Large Language Models
LLMs Large Language Models
RAG Retrieval-Augmented Generation
SOTA State of The Art
RoBERTa Robustly Optimized BERT Pre-training Approach
ViT Vision Transformer
BERT Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
Appendix A
Appendix A.1
As shown in Table A1, to help readers better understand the methods proposed in this
paper, we provide the detailed pseudocode.

--- Page 16 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 16 of 20
Table A1. Pseudocode of FG-E2HMD.
# ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Pseudocode: Towards Detecting Chinese Harmful Memes with Fine-Grained
Explanatory Augmentation
# ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# 1. Global Constants and Pre-trained Models
PRETRAINED_MLLM = load_model(“Qwen2.5-VL-7B”) # frozen weights
TEXT_ENCODER = load_model(“RoBERTa”) # trainable weights
CLASSIFIER = MLP(input_dim = 2 * hidden_dim,
Output_dim = 2) # harmful/harmless
CULTURE_AWARE_PROMPT=read_prompt_template(“culture_aware_template.txt”)
# 2. Multimodal Feature Alignment Module
def multimodal_feature_alignment(image I, text T):
“””
Input: original image I and text T
Output: unified multimodal representation F extracted by frozen MLLM
mm
“””
F = PRETRAINED_MLLM.encode([I, T]) # [hidden_dim]
mm
return = F # Shared by subsequent module
mm
# 3. Culture-Aware Explanation Generation Module
def culture_aware_explanation_generation(F ):
mm
“””
Input: multimodal representation F
mm
Output: Structured explanation text T
exp
“””
prompt = fill_template(CULTURE_AWARE_PROMPT, F )
mm
T = PRETRAINED_MLLM.generate(prompt) # output after instruction
exp
# fine-tuning
return T
exp
# 4. Explanation-enhanced Decision-making Module
def explanation_enhanced_decision(F , T ):
mm exp
“””
Input: original multimodal feature F , explanation text T
mm exp
Output: harmful probability distribution yˆ
“””
# 4.1 explanation text encoding
F = TEXT_ENCODER.encode(T ) # [hidden_dim]
exp exp
# 4.2 feature fusion
F = concatenate([F , F ]) # [2 * hidden_dim]
final mm exp
# 4.3 classification
logits = CLASSIFIER(F ) # dim = 2
final
yˆ = softmax(logits) # probability vector
return yˆ
# 5. End-to-end Inference Process
def main(image_path, text_content):
I = load_image(image_path)
T = text_content
F = multimodal_feature_alignment(I, T)
mm
T = culture_aware_explanation_generation(F )
exp mm

--- Page 17 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 17 of 20
Table A1. Cont.
yˆ = explanation_enhanced_decision(F , T )
mm exp
predicted_label = argmax(yˆ) # 0: harmless, 1: harmful
return {
“label”: predicted_label,
“probability”: yˆ,
“explanation”: T
exp
# 6. Training Loop(optional)
def train_step(batch):
for (I, T, y) in batch:
F = multimodal_feature_alignment(I, T)
mm
T = culture_aware_explanation_generation(F )
exp mm
yˆ = explanation_enhanced_decision(F , T )
mm exp
loss = cross_entropy(yˆ, y)
backpropagate(loss, parameters=[TEXT_ENCODER, CLASSIFIER])
optimizer_step()
Appendix A.2
As shown in Table A2, it illustrates the main parameter settings in the experiment.
Table A2. Hyperparameters for experiments.
Parameter Category Setting
Optimizer AdamW
Batch Size 32
Learning Rate 1 × 10−5
Training Epochs 10
β1 0.9
β2 0.95
Weight Decay 0.02
Qwen2.5-VL-7B
Model
RoBERTa (chinese-roberta-wwm-ext-base)
GPUs 2 × NVIDIA RTX A6000
Appendix A.3
As shown in Table A3, our proposed FG-E2HMD is tested directly on the newly
collected dataset, obtaining an F1 score of 74.57. After only five epochs of fine-tuning, the
model’s F1 score reached 80.80. These results demonstrate the generalization and scalability
of FG-E2HMD.
Table A3. Evaluation results of FG-E2HMD on our newly collected datasets.
Model P R F1 F1
harm
FG-E2HMD 75.62 73.54 74.57 68.59
FG-E2HMD after 5
80.25 81.36 80.80 71.35
epochs fine-tuned

--- Page 18 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 18 of 20
Appendix A.4
As shown in Figure A1, the scores of our proposed method FG-E2HMD are the highest
under four metrics, indicating the effectiveness of our proposed method.
Figure A1. Performance comparison of different models on the ToxiCN MM test set.
References
1. Zhuang, Y.; Guo, K.; Wang, J.; Jing, Y.; Xu, X.; Yi, W.; Yang, M.; Zhao, B.; Hu, H. I Know What You MEME! Understanding and
Detecting Harmful Memes with Multimodal Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium, San Diego, CA, USA, 24–28 February 2025; Internet Society: San Diego, CA, USA, 2025.
2. Kiela, D.; Firooz, H.; Mohan, A.; Goswami, V.; Singh, A.; Ringshia, P.; Testuggine, D. The Hateful Memes Challenge: Detecting
Hate Speech in Multimodal Memes. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2005.04790. [CrossRef]
3. Zhang, L.; Jin, L.; Sun, X.; Xu, G.; Zhang, Z.; Li, X.; Liu, N.; Liu, Q.; Yan, S. TOT: Topology-Aware Optimal Transport for
Multimodal Hate Detection. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2303.09314. [CrossRef]
4. Cao, R.; Hee, M.S.; Kuek, A.; Chong, W.-H.; Lee, R.K.-W.; Jiang, J. Pro-Cap: Leveraging a Frozen Vision-Language Model for
Hateful Meme Detection. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2308.08088. [CrossRef]
5. Gomez, R.; Gibert, J.; Gomez, L.; Karatzas, D. Exploring Hate Speech Detection in Multimodal Publications. arXiv 2019,
arXiv:1910.03814. [CrossRef]
6. Hee, M.S.; Lee, R.K.-W. Demystifying Hateful Content: Leveraging Large Multimodal Models for Hateful Meme Detection with
Explainable Decisions. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2502.11073. [CrossRef]
7. Yang, S.; Cui, S.; Hu, C.; Wang, H.; Zhang, T.; Huang, M.; Lu, J.; Qiu, H. Exploring Multimodal Challenges in Toxic Chinese
Detection: Taxonomy, Benchmark, and Findings. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2505.24341. [CrossRef]
8. Scott, K. Memes as Multimodal Metaphors: A Relevance Theory Analysis. Pragmat. Cogn. 2021, 28, 277–298. [CrossRef]
9. Lin, H.; Luo, Z.; Gao, W.; Ma, J.; Wang, B.; Yang, R. Towards Explainable Harmful Meme Detection through Multimodal Debate
between Large Language Models. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2401.13298. [CrossRef]
10. Lu, J.; Xu, B.; Zhang, X.; Wang, H.; Zhu, H.; Zhang, D.; Yang, L.; Lin, H. Towards Comprehensive Detection of Chinese Harmful
Memes 2024. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2410.02378. [CrossRef]
11. Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-Training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understand-
ing. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1810.04805. [CrossRef]
12. Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A.N.; Kaiser, L.; Polosukhin, I. Attention Is All You Need.
arXiv 2017, arXiv:1706.03762. [CrossRef]

--- Page 19 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 19 of 20
13. Dosovitskiy, A.; Beyer, L.; Kolesnikov, A.; Weissenborn, D.; Zhai, X.; Unterthiner, T.; Dehghani, M.; Minderer, M.; Heigold, G.;
Gelly, S.; et al. An Image Is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[CrossRef]
14. Ji, J.; Ren, W.; Naseem, U. Identifying Creative Harmful Memes via Prompt Based Approach. In Proceedings of the ACM Web
Conference 2023, Austin, TX, USA, 30 April–4 May 2023; ACM: Austin, TX, USA; pp. 3868–3872.
15. Gu, T.; Feng, M.; Feng, X.; Wang, X. SCARE: A Novel Framework to Enhance Chinese Harmful Memes Detection. IEEE Trans.
Affect. Comput. 2025, 16, 933–945. [CrossRef]
16. Hee, M.S.; Chong, W.-H.; Lee, R.K.-W. Decoding the Underlying Meaning of Multimodal Hateful Memes. arXiv 2023,
arXiv:2305.17678. [CrossRef]
17. Hwang, E.; Shwartz, V. MemeCap: A Dataset for Captioning and Interpreting Memes. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Singapore, 6–10 December 2023; Bouamor, H., Pino, J., Bali, K., Eds.;
Association for Computational Linguistics: Singapore, 2023; pp. 1433–1445.
18. Zhu, D.; Chen, J.; Shen, X.; Li, X.; Elhoseiny, M. MiniGPT-4: Enhancing Vision-Language Understanding with Advanced Large
Language Models. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2304.10592. [CrossRef]
19. Zhang, R.; Han, J.; Liu, C.; Gao, P.; Zhou, A.; Hu, X.; Yan, S.; Lu, P.; Li, H.; Qiao, Y. LLaMA-Adapter: Efficient Fine-Tuning of
Language Models with Zero-Init Attention. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2303.16199. [CrossRef]
20. Gao, P.; Han, J.; Zhang, R.; Lin, Z.; Geng, S.; Zhou, A.; Zhang, W.; Lu, P.; He, C.; Yue, X.; et al. LLaMA-Adapter V2: Parameter-
Efficient Visual Instruction Model 2023. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2304.15010. [CrossRef]
21. Liu, H.; Li, C.; Wu, Q.; Lee, Y.J. Visual Instruction Tuning. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2304.08485. [CrossRef]
22. Ye, Q.; Xu, H.; Xu, G.; Ye, J.; Yan, M.; Zhou, Y.; Wang, J.; Hu, A.; Shi, P.; Shi, Y.; et al. mPLUG-Owl: Modularization Empowers
Large Language Models with Multimodality. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2304.14178. [CrossRef]
23. Wei, J.; Wang, X.; Schuurmans, D.; Bosma, M.; Ichter, B.; Xia, F.; Chi, E.; Le, Q.; Zhou, D. Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits
Reasoning in Large Language Models. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2201.11903. [CrossRef]
24. Pan, F.; Luu, A.T.; Wu, X. Detecting Harmful Memes with Decoupled Understanding and Guided CoT Reasoning. arXiv 2025,
arXiv:2506.08477. [CrossRef]
25. Meguellati, E.; Zeghina, A.; Sadiq, S.; Demartini, G. LLM-Based Semantic Augmentation for Harmful Content Detection. arXiv
2025, arXiv:2504.15548. [CrossRef]
26. Bui, M.D.; von der Wense, K.; Lauscher, A. Multi3Hate: Multimodal, Multilingual, and Multicultural Hate Speech Detection with
Vision-Language Models. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2411.03888. [CrossRef]
27. Ranjan, R.; Ayinala, L.; Vatsa, M.; Singh, R. Multimodal Zero-Shot Framework for Deepfake Hate Speech Detection in Low-
Resource Languages. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2506.08372. [CrossRef]
28. Rana, A.; Jha, S. Emotion Based Hate Speech Detection Using Multimodal Learning. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2202.06218. [CrossRef]
29. Pramanick, S.; Dimitrov, D.; Mukherjee, R.; Sharma, S.; Akhtar, M.S.; Nakov, P.; Chakraborty, T. Detecting Harmful Memes and
Their Targets. In Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, Online Event,
1–6 August 2021; Zong, C., Xia, F., Li, W., Navigli, R., Eds.; Association for Computational Linguistics: Stroudsburg, PA, USA,
2021; pp. 2783–2796.
30. Kumari, G.; Bandyopadhyay, D.; Ekbal, A.; NarayanaMurthy, V.B. CM-Off-Meme: Code-Mixed Hindi-English Offensive Meme
Detection with Multi-Task Learning by Leveraging Contextual Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International
Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), Torino, Italy, 20–25 May
2024; Calzolari, N., Kan, M.-Y., Hoste, V., Lenci, A., Sakti, S., Xue, N., Eds.; ELRA and ICCL: Torino, Italia, 2024; pp. 3380–3393.
31. Modi, T.; Shah, E.; Shah, S.; Kanakia, J.; Tiwari, M. Meme Classification and Offensive Content Detection Using Multimodal
Approach. In Proceedings of the 2024 OITS International Conference on Information Technology (OCIT), Vijayawada, India,
12 December 2024; pp. 635–640.
32. Prasad, N.; Saha, S.; Bhattacharyya, P. Multimodal Hate Speech Detection from Videos and Texts. Available online: https:
//easychair.org/publications/preprint/km3Rv/open (accessed on 25 July 2025).
33. Lin, H.; Luo, Z.; Ma, J.; Chen, L. Beneath the Surface: Unveiling Harmful Memes with Multimodal Reasoning Distilled from
Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023,
Singapore, 6–10 December 2023; Bouamor, H., Pino, J., Bali, K., Eds.; Association for Computational Linguistics: Singapore, 2023;
pp. 9114–9128.
34. Pandiani, D.S.M.; Sang, E.T.K.; Ceolin, D. Toxic Memes: A Survey of Computational Perspectives on the Detection and Explanation
of Meme Toxicities. arXiv 2024, arXiv:2406.07353. [CrossRef]
35. Liu, X.; Zhu, Y.; Lan, Y.; Yang, C.; Qiao, Y. Safety of Multimodal Large Language Models on Images and Texts. EasyChair preprint
2023, 10743. [CrossRef]

--- Page 20 ---
Electronics 2025, 14, 3504 20 of 20
36. Sivaananth, S.V.; Sivagireeswaran, S.; Ravindran, S.; Nabi, F.G. Two-Stage Classification of Offensive Meme Content and Analysis.
In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE 8th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (CICT), Prayagraj,
India, 6–8 December 2024; pp. 1–6.
37. Rizwan, N.; Bhaskar, P.; Das, M.; Majhi, S.S.; Saha, P.; Mukherjee, A. Zero Shot VLMs for Hate Meme Detection: Are We There
Yet? arXiv 2024, arXiv:2402.12198. [CrossRef]
38. Briskilal, J.; Karthik, M.J.; Praneeth, S. Detection of Offensive Text in Memes Using Deep Learning Techniques. AIP Conf. Proc.
2024, 3075, 020232. [CrossRef]
39. Kmainasi, M.B.; Hasnat, A.; Hasan, M.A.; Shahroor, A.E.; Alam, F. MemeIntel: Explainable Detection of Propagandistic and
Hateful Memes. arXiv 2025, arXiv:2502.16612. [CrossRef]
40. Tabassum, I.; Nunavath, V. A Hybrid Deep Learning Approach for Multi-Class Cyberbullying Classification Using Multi-Modal
Social Media Data. Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 12007. [CrossRef]
41. Ke, W.; Chan, K.-H. A Multilayer CARU Framework to Obtain Probability Distribution for Paragraph-Based Sentiment Analysis.
Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 11344. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.